---
layout: article
title: 
  "long": "Idioms"
  "short": "Idioms"
doi:
author: 
  creator: "Mitra, Durba"
  name: Durba Mitra
  shortname: Mitra
  bio: "Durba Mitra is Assistant Professor of Women, Gender, and Sexuality and Carol K. Pforzheimer Assistant Professor at the Radcliffe Institute at Harvard University."
  url: https://wgs.fas.harvard.edu/people/durba-mitra
  date: 2018-06-23
issue: 1
order: 1
abstract: ""
language: en
dcType: article
---

# Idioms

{: .author-credit }
by [Durba Mitra](https://wgs.fas.harvard.edu/people/durba-mitra)

I have often joked that I never get American idioms quite right. Maybe it is
  because I am an immigrant, and I never quite knew the correct use of
  expressions in American English. You would think, considering how much I
  tried to emulate Americans in my life as a first-generation Indian kid in
  Fargo, North Dakota, that I would be better at idioms. But one mode of
  expression that my mother taught me, one that I heard again and again in our
  household, was *“I work like a dog.”* My mother is an immigrant, a single
  parent who somehow managed to get a PhD while raising children alone and
  working full time. She often worked extra jobs to make ends meet. Our
  family’s story was not as ideal as many immigrants who came after the 1965
  Immigration and Naturalization Act. After the family came here, we were
  pretty much poor. But we had many advantages. We came at a time when rural
  America wanted our intellectual and skilled labor.

Why did she “work like a dog”? In part to pay for those vital documents that
would let us continue to live here. When our family was to be naturalized, our
family like so many others was swindled by a lawyer who we hired to help us
obtain citizenship. He knew he could easily to make money off of our desperate
need for documents. When we finally received documents after thousands of
dollars and hundreds of hours of labor, my mother kept working like a dog. We
pursued the right to be in this place in the middle of America, a place that
loved the labor that people like my mother could give, but made sure that we
knew we were not of this place. We had documents, but we were not really meant
to use America’s idioms.

For this project, a group of scholars, activists, digital humanists—largely
immigrants—have come together to painstakingly document the landscape of
prisons, jails, detention camps that remain largely *undocumented* for the
public, hidden from view. Centers of incarceration that we do not see, that we
do not realize have taken up the entire landscape of America. Take away the
map behind “[Clinks](/torn-apart/visualizations.html#clinks)” and what remains? The entire map of America, including its
colonial holdings. ICE is everywhere, it *is* the American landscape. There
appears to be almost as many ICE detention facilities across the country as
there are McDonald’s. ICE, like public and private correctional facilities,
must be one of the ways that the unemployment rate has gone down, certainly in
rural America. Those facilities must hold the immigrants that come to North
Dakota to work on farms. 

From these visuals in *Torn Apart/Separados*, we get the fullest picture of
the American landscape of immigration control. From afar, “[The
Trap](/torn-apart/visualizations.html#the-trap)” is a dead
zone, quite literally. It looks like an arrow pointing south, wider than one
would ever imagine the border between the US and Mexico. From “[The
Eye](/torn-apart/visualizations.html#the-eye],” we
learn that ICE facilities, when viewed from above, incarcerate people on every
sort of terrain, hills and valleys and deserts. ICE is everywhere, on all
kinds of land, and these bird’s eye views show just how diverse and agile the
ICE infrastructure is. Sometimes not even on land, like the visual data I see
of the now emptied ICE facility on San Juan, Puerto Rico. So where is the
border exactly? I would say, based on these *Torn Apart/Separados*
visualizations, America is only borderland with no interior. There is no
in-land or safe ground for immigrants. From California, to the New York
Island. In California, I see the aerial view of a huge facility surrounded by
sandy dirt. Just outside the New York Island, the ICE facility is Riker’s jail
itself, where detainers are placed on thousands of people awaiting trial who
have been denied their right to due process. That facility is a penal colony.

In the visual of the Office of Refugee Resettlement Redactions
(“[ORR](/torn-apart/visualizations.html#orr)”), we see a system that claims
its legitimacy through the language of the document but is required to give no
documentation itself. The map of the redacted and unreported ICE centers is
like a game of peekaboo. Black circles that lead you to a location and then
disappear when you try to click on them. There is nothing more to know, we are
told. These people do not have documents, we are told. We do not have a right
to know these detention centers or these people, we are told. People are being
incarcerated indefinitely with no rights, for *our* benefit, we are told. 

In pursuit of our documents, my own family had to answer countless questions.
Where are we from? Why do we wish to become Americans? We were also left with
our own questions that could not be answered. How much should one pay for a
lawyer? How long will my greencard be “in process”? What will we have to leave
behind? How long will we be detained at the airport? Why did they steal our
hard-earned money? How could they do this to us?

What I see in these sophisticated maps and data visualizations are many
graphic, detailed illustrations that show the vast reach of this network of
detention centers, prisons, and private for-profit jails and detention
facilities. I see the impressive efforts of scholars and activists who have
built *Torn Apart/Separados*. They have made visualization after visualization
that expose the extensive infrastructure of immigration and border control
that now defines the terrain of American social and political life. The
visualizations document, from facility to facility, the exponential increase
in ICE detentions between 2014 and 2018. *Torn Apart/Separados* demonstrates
that this situation, this immigration “crisis,” is not new, nor is it
accidental. 

From *Torn Apart/Separados*, we have more information related to the
infrastructure of ICE available and visualized for us than any other publicly
available resource on the immigration crisis today. Yet viewing these maps, I
have few answers and more questions. These questions perhaps cannot be
answered by visualizations alone. Why are we imprisoning people who seek
asylum? Where have they moved migrant children? Why are people so willingly
ignorant of ICE policies? And what are immigrants working like dogs for in
this landscape of prisons?

---
{: .bio-slug}
[Durba Mitra](https://wgs.fas.harvard.edu/people/durba-mitra) is Assistant Professor of Women, Gender, and Sexuality and Carol K. Pforzheimer Assistant Professor at the Radcliffe Institute at Harvard University. 
