---
layout: article
title: 
  "long": "Mapping Maybe"
  "short": "Mapping Maybe"
doi:
author: 
  creator: "Sá Pereira, Moacir P. de"
  name: Moacir P. de Sá Pereira
  shortname: Moacir
  bio: "Moacir P. de Sá Pereira ([@muziejus](http://twitter.com/muziejus)) is Assistant Professor / Faculty Fellow of English at New York University."
  date: 2018-06-23
  url: https://moacir.com
issue: 1
order: 1
abstract: "This could only have ever been an instance of what Lauren Berlant calls “genre flailing,” of what it is that we do in a crisis. Why am I on this team? Why am I helping build this site? Because its nimbleness, its speed, its improvisation plays at papering over the cracks that crisis creates. Because I, we, everyone has to do *something*.  We don’t even know what we’re *against*, exactly, we just know that we feel its presence; it perturbs us."
language: en
dcType: article
---

### Reflection


#### Mapping Maybe
##### by [Moacir P. de Sá Pereira](http://moacir.com/)

> What is unprecedented is not the loss of a home but the impossibility of
finding a new one… [This is] a problem not of space but of political
organization.[^arendt]

This could only have ever been an instance of what Lauren Berlant calls
“[genre flailing](https://socialtextjournal.org/big-man/),” of what it is that
we do in a crisis. Why am I on this team? Why am I helping build this site?
Because its nimbleness, its speed, its improvisation plays at papering over
the cracks that crisis creates. Because I, we, everyone has to do *something*.
We don’t even know what we’re *against*, exactly, we just know that we feel
its presence; it perturbs us.

Yet this is the crisis that has been the crisis that has been the crisis. For
all the blockades put up and [regimens
instituted](http://www.nybooks.com/daily/2016/11/10/trump-election-autocracy-rules-for-survival/)
to prevent the tearing apart of norms, it had to be this way. Working through
Hannah Arendt’s 

Giorgio Agamben notes that “refugees… put the originary fiction of modern
sovereignty into crisis.”[^agamben1] The visualizations here generate a
challenge to the rhetoric of the wall, where a fixation on determining who is
in and who is out produces both chilling multimodal reports of a government
doing what needs to be done to respect the distinction and the continued
fantasy that such determination is even possible while also granting people
“inalienable rights.” 

Are these concentration camps? In the original camps, “a state of emergency
linked to a colonial war [was] extended to an entire civil population,”
abstracted to defining the camp as “*the space that is opened when the state
of exception begins to become the rule*.”[^agamben2] The camp, then, as the
“fundamental biopolitical paradigm of the West,” in its mere presence
reaffirms the permanence of the state of exception.[^agamben3] This state of
exception predates November 8, 2016, after all, despite the desire to talk
of ICE’s infection of the American body, springing up like uninvited pimples
all over our national face after a recent, mistaken, gluttonous pizza dinner
doing business as a presidential election.[^yerba-buena]

An Ivy League English professor asks Twitter, “Who will write the political
theory of mass exhaustion?” as a result of personally feeling “particularly
exhausted” by the historical now. I think about the exhausted bodies unable to
cross borders with ease. About those who can’t afford TSA Pre✓®, without even
considering the price of a plane ticket, or a visa, or a passport… The bodies
that accumulate exhausting weight on disintegrating frames as the inability to
move unperturbed through national lines leaves them separated from their loved
ones. The bodies that, even should they end up in the US, tire and creak under
an oppressive labor regime, under an oppressive state always seeing the
bodies, always surveilling. Each glance, each moment of becoming a morsel in
the state’s insatiable data-collection maw adds to the weight on the body.
More exhaustion. Then there are the bodies that [*literally die of
exhaustion*](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/report-us-border-patrol-desert-weapon-immigrants-mexico)
because of the logic of the nation-state. In “Big Man,” Berlant writes about
the fattening of the white body, in how whiteness is becoming “enfleshed.”
There a different exhaustion awaits, I suppose, as these bodies begin to move
thickly through space, perturbing and being perturbed by the surroundings.

Flailing itself, of course, exhausts. Can it be otherwise? Yet… maybe this
time. Maybe this coalition. Maybe this action. This heavy wall isn’t see
through, meaning we don’t know what might be thrown over it, but we also don’t
even know what’s beyond it.

The exhausted body is also the particularized body, denied the unmarked
transcendence of universality. Johanna Drucker calls for “humanistic methods”
when we use visual forms to produce knowledge, pointing to how John Snow’s
data visualization of the Broad Street cholera outbreak of 1854 flattens the
deaths into mere dots. “Who are those dots,” asks Drucker, reminding us that
“each dot represents a life, and no life is identical.”[^drucker1]

The visualizations here aim to heed Drucker’s call, and each one, hopefully,
“*produces the knowledge it draws*,” even if that knowledge is more affective
and intimate than we might expect from the knowledge-generating properties of
the most effective visualizations.[^drucker2] While _Torn Apart / Separados_
has not presented many technical challenges, an underlying irony of the
visualizations is that despite Google’s (or Esri’s, or NASA’s, or USGS’s, or
whoever’s) God’s Eye, an Eye reproduced most explicitly in the visualization
“[The Eye](/torn-apart/visualizations.html#the-eye),” the crisis, such as it
is, emerged entirely because of the unseeable—or at least the previously
unseen, despite the “conquering gaze” of the techno-monster, here to perform
the “god-trick of seeing everything from nowhere.”[^haraway] Children’s being
separated from parents happens daily without “our” knowledge; the black holes
of the [Office of Refugee Resettlement](https://www.acf.hhs.gov/orr) hide
children crossing the border, both for their safety and for our own comfort.
We don’t take on the weight of their sticky, obstacled steps through space.

The unknowing and uncertainty occasioned because of speed, because of a
secretive government, because of concerns over children’s safety, leave the
visualizations in tenuous relationship to privacy. We see all, and we rely on
that voyeurism to allow the leap into transcendence to imagine the role of ICE
and other agencies involved in immigration to gesture towards the ability to
grasp the whole crisis at once. Not just we, but [_The Washington
Post_](https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/2018/national/migrant-child-shelters/)
and [_The New York
Times_](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2018/06/21/us/where-are-the-border-children.html)
have read the news last week and felt that immediate urge to map the problem.
Where are the children? But as Arendt reminds us, the problem isn’t spatial;
it’s political.

Veronica Sawyer, in the 1988 movie
[_Heathers_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heathers), chastises Heather McNamara for
wanting “to become a statistic on _U. S. Fucking A. Today_,” adding that doing
so is “about the least private thing” she can think of. The circumstances are
different, but the tension is reproduced here. Every dot on Snow’s map is a
life, is a loved one now gone. And yet put together, they’re generalized by the
techno-monsters into statistics.

The rhetoric surrounding the [American borders that are
everywhere](https://www.vox.com/2015/2/7/7993273/border-port-map) moves
towards discussion of “dehumanization” In referring to people eager to come
to the United States, often (if not typically?) fleeing a political or
economic situation launched or exacerbated by the United States itself, as an
“infestation,” both points above glow like the dots on our maps. We render
their lives bare (even though so are, increasingly, our own), and then we
flatten them for printing in _U. S. Fucking A. Today_. Yet maybe this time.

[^agamben1]: Giorgio Agamben, _Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life_, trans. Daniel Heller-Roazen (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1998), 131.

[^agamben2]: Agamben, 166, 168–169.

[^agamben3]: Agamben, 181.

[^yerba-buena]: On zits, consider the unsettled persona looking to stop her own genre flailing through what Urayoán Noel calls Sandra Maria Esteves’s “organic poetics”: “[I got up this morning to brush my teeth](http://www.sandraesteves.com/images/480_Yerba_Buena_p31.jpg) / and found seven new imples on my face / The first pimpe was green / had a picture of george washington / smiled at me a long time saying it was my friend / but when I squeezed it / it was full of war and blood.” Noel, _In Visible Movement: Nuyorican Poetry from the Sixties to Slam_ (Iowa City, University of Iowa Press: 2014), 75–82 and Esteves, “Staring into the eye of truth,” in _Yerba buena: dibujos y poemas_ (Greenfield Center, NY: Greenfield Review, 1980), 44.  Note especially how crisis and the various modes of flailing themselves reproduce themselves in the persona’s body, on her face, while she looks below, to the humus, to ground and stop the flailing.

[^drucker1]: Johanna Drucker, _Graphesis: Visual Forms of Knowledge Production_ (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014), 136.

[^drucker2]: Drucker, 3.

[^arendt]: Hannah Arendt, _The Origins of Totalitarianism_ (San Diego: Harcourt, Inc., 1985), 293–294.

[^haraway]: Donna Haraway, “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective,” in _Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: the Reinvention of Nature_ Donna Haraway (New York: Routledge, 1991), 188, 189.

---

{: .bio-slug}
[Moacir P. de Sá Pereira]([@muziejus](http://twitter.com/muziejus)) is Assistant Professor / Faculty Fellow of English at New York University.
